Pregnancy is an exciting time for parents. You’ll most likely have a lot of questions about your upcoming journey. The good news is you’ve got some time to gather information, calm your fears, and prepare for the realities of parenthood. 

The experienced obstetrician-gynecologists (ob-gyns) at NewYork-Presbyterian can help answer questions and provide you with the highest level of care to keep you and your baby healthy throughout your pregnancy. Our focus is prenatal care, which considers your unique health needs, personal philosophies, and preferences. 

Common Pregnancy Questions
Pregnancy lasts about 40 weeks, starting from the first day of your last normal menstrual period. The weeks are grouped into three trimesters. While each day may bring additional questions, there’s one constant: the obstetric team at NewYork-Presbyterian is here to guide you. Here are some answers to your most common pregnancy queries.

First Trimester
Even before taking that first pregnancy test, you may experience pregnancy symptoms. Whether its fatigue, nausea, breast tenderness, or intense food cravings, these may be signs you’re expecting. Pregnancy symptoms may last for the entire first trimester.

How soon can you take a pregnancy test?
Some home pregnancy tests claim you can use them even before your first missed period, but they’ll be more accurate if you wait until the first day of your missed period. Your body doesn’t start to make the pregnancy hormone, human chorionic gonadotropin, or hCG, until about ten days after conception. Professionals advise that the earlier someone takes the test, the harder it is for the test to detect the hCG. If your periods are irregular, test about three weeks after unprotected sex.

How accurate are pregnancy tests?
Pregnancy tests—whether they are done at home or at the doctor’s office—are about 99 percent accurate. If you have a positive result, you should call your doctor to schedule an appointment for prenatal care. If your pregnancy test is negative, you may have taken it too early. Take another test in a few days. Call your doctor if it’s still negative but you still haven’t gotten your period. They can do a blood test to check for sure.

When do pregnancy symptoms start?
Pregnancy symptoms can begin as early as five weeks into pregnancy or a week after your first missed period. The most common signs are nausea, breast tenderness, increased urination, and fatigue. Most women experience symptoms by about week eight of pregnancy.

Why do pregnant women feel tired?
One of the first signs of pregnancy may be feeling so exhausted you want to crawl into bed and stay there all day. You can blame pregnancy hormones, specifically the rise in progesterone in the first trimester. Pregnancy can also decrease blood pressure and blood sugar levels, which can tire you out. The good news: your energy should improve once you get into the second trimester.

Is cramping during pregnancy normal?
You may experience cramping very early in the pregnancy—before you realize that you’re expecting—due to the embryo implanting into your uterus. But you may also notice some cramping in the first trimester. This cramping may happen when you exercise or make a sudden movement like rolling over in bed. It’s caused by a uterine ligament spasm and/or irritation of nearby nerve fibers. It should go away on its own. Let your doctor know right away if cramping persists or worsens, as it could signal an ectopic pregnancy.

When do you begin showing during pregnancy?
Every woman is different, but most display a burgeoning belly by around week 16-20 of pregnancy. If they’ve had a previous pregnancy, they may “show” earlier.

When do pregnancy cravings start?
Up to 90 percent of all American women report pregnancy cravings, and around ¾ experience them by the 13th week of pregnancy. Top of the list? Chocolate, followed by high-calorie carbohydrates such as pizza and chips, and animal proteins like chicken and steak a close third.

What part of the breast hurts in early pregnancy?
There’s no one part of the breast that hurts more than the other, although you may notice that you’re extra sensitive and sore around your nipples. Your breasts may feel fuller or heavier and even tingle. 

When does pregnancy nausea start?
Like many pregnancy symptoms, nausea often varies among women. It can begin as early as a couple of weeks after you conceive or show up later in the trimester. Some women may notice their nausea resolve after a few weeks, and some find it continues throughout the pregnancy. While often referred to as “morning sickness,” pregnancy-related nausea can happen at any time or even in the evening.

When does heartburn start in pregnancy?
Heartburn can happen at any time, and for some women, it begins in the first trimester. Pregnancy hormones like progesterone relax the valve between your stomach and esophagus. As a result, stomach acid can back up, causing you to feel the burn. Eating smaller meals and sleeping propped up can help.

Second Trimester
Many early pregnancy symptoms such as fatigue and nausea may improve during the second trimester and sometimes even disappear. But even if this part of pregnancy seems smooth sailing, it’s essential to stay up to date on your pregnancy checkups. Aside from routine monitoring, you’ll have at least one ultrasound scan and glucose screening to check for gestational diabetes this trimester. 

What kind of breast changes are normal during pregnancy?
During the second trimester, your breasts may get bigger, thanks to a growth in both fat and milk glands. Your nipples may darken and develop small bumps. Your areolas—the dark areas around your nipples—may get larger, too. Towards the end of your pregnancy, a yellowish, sticky liquid may begin to leak from your nipples. This is called colostrum, and it’ll feed your baby the first few days after birth. 

When can you start to feel the baby move?
You can feel your baby move usually midway through your second trimester. Initially, it may feel like gentle flutters in your belly. Rest assured, your baby’s moved before, but they were too small for you to feel it. Second (or third, or fourth) time moms may notice these flutters earlier.

What should I eat during my second trimester of pregnancy?
Most pregnant women require about 2200 calories a day during their second trimester. Focus on foods rich in protein, calcium, and healthy fats, like omega-3s, and low in added sugars. In general, that means:

Grains like bread, cereal, rice, and pasta
Vegetables
Fruit
Dairies, such as milk, yogurt, or cheese
Poultry, fish, meat, dry beans, eggs, and nuts
Should I avoid certain types of foods during pregnancy?
While most foods are okay, at least in moderation, there are some you should keep off your plate. They include:

High mercury fish such as bigeye tuna (canned light tuna is safe), mackerel, orange roughy, swordfish, and shark.
Raw seafood (including uncooked sushi)
Unpasteurized dairy products, such as soft cheeses like brie, feta, and blue cheese
Alcohol
Herbal tea
More than 200 mg of caffeine (the equivalent of two eight-ounce cups of coffee)
How big is your uterus during pregnancy?
Your uterus goes from the size of a small one-ounce lemon to the size of a two-pound watermelon when you give birth. It will shrink back down to its pre-pregnancy size about six weeks postpartum.

Third Trimester
You’re in the home stretch, but your baby—and your uterus—still have plenty of growing to do. You’ll see your health care provider more frequently, including the possibility of weekly visits once you get closer to your delivery date.

When do more regular checkups start?
Regular checkups may begin once you enter your third trimester. From now on, you will see your health care provider every two weeks. Once you reach week 36, you’ll have weekly prenatal visits until you deliver. These visits are often short and sweet, and that’s okay. You’ll still need to go to them.

When do cervical checks start in pregnancy?
Cervical checks generally begin around 36 -38 weeks. As you near your due date, your cervix may thin and soften as it prepares to dilate. This is normal and your body’s way of getting your birth canal open and ready. 

During the last month of pregnancy, your doctor may check your progress by doing a quick cervical check. Not all physicians do them, though—and not all women want them—so you can always discuss whether or not you need them with your provider.

What does it mean if my doctor tells me I’m dilated? 
The cervix thins and widens as your body prepares for birth. The widening of the cervix is referred to as dilation. Before you get too excited, remember that you can stay one centimeter dilated for days or even weeks. Other clues that a woman may be approaching labor include the loss of her mucus plug, water breaking, and increased contractions. However, not all women may experience all (or any) of these signs.

Labor & Delivery
While many pregnant people may worry about not knowing when they are in labor, it is usually quite clear once it happens. Medical professionals characterize labor as intense contractions increasing in frequency and intensity over time. 

Strong signs of labor may include experiencing contractions that come every five to ten minutes. Typically, a health provider will tell pregnant people to call when the contractions are every five minutes, last for 1 minute, for at least 1 hour. Some may call this the 5-1-1 rule. 

Others may include water breaking or seeing bloody vaginal mucus. If you’re in doubt, you can call your provider, who may tell you to head to the labor and delivery unit.  

When do most women go into labor?
The average length of pregnancy is 40 weeks. But it’s just that: an average. Most women go into labor between 38 and 41 weeks of their pregnancy. 

How does birth feel?
For many, contractions are the most memorable part of labor. Contractions are when your uterine muscles tighten up and then relax. These can feel like anything, from menstrual cramps to cramping associated with an intense stomach ache. 

These contractions last for up to a minute and come five to ten minutes apart (they get more intense and closer together over time.) Usually, the pain is so bad you can’t walk or talk. At some point during labor, your water may break. Water breaking may feel like a gentle tickle or a big rush of fluid. 

How much weight do you lose after giving birth?
Don’t pressure yourself to lose weight quickly, as your body needs time to rest and heal after delivery. Each woman loses postpartum weight at their own time and pace. Medical professionals advise pregnant patients to have lost all their pregnancy weight by six months postpartum. 

How long do you bleed after giving birth?
You’ll have lochia, or vaginal bleeding, for about six weeks after delivery. It will be heaviest the first ten days, then ease off. This process is nature’s way of getting rid of all the extra blood and tissue your body uses during pregnancy. 

Let your doctor know if your bleeding is very heavy (more than a pad an hour) and/or contains clots bigger than a quarter.

How long does it take to heal after giving birth?
Don’t expect to bounce back in a few days. Women typically feel better in six to eight weeks. Your doctor can help you develop a recovery plan that works for you.




Pregnancy: Common Questions
There are plenty of myths and “old wives’ tales” about pregnancy. You may need help separating fact from fiction. On this sheet, you’ll find answers to a few common questions. If you have other questions, talk with your healthcare provider.


Will Working Harm My Baby?
In most cases, working throughout your pregnancy is not harmful at all. There may be concerns if the job involves dangerous machinery or chemicals, lifting, or standing for very long periods of time. Talk with your healthcare provider and employer about your particular job and pregnancy.

Is It Safe To Have Sex During Pregnancy?
Yes, unless you are specifically advised not to by your healthcare provider.

Why Can’t I Change The Cat Litter Box?
Cats carry a disease called toxoplasmosis. In adult humans, it shows up as a mild infection of the blood and organs. If you are infected during pregnancy, the baby’s brain and eyes could be damaged. To be safe, have someone else change the litter. If you must handle it, wear a paper mask over your nose and mouth. Also, wear gloves and wash your hands afterward.

Which Medicines Are Safe?
No prescription or over-the-counter medicine is safe for everyone all of the time. But sometimes medicines are needed. Be sure your healthcare provider knows you are pregnant. Then use only the medicines they advise you to take.

Is It True That I Can Overheat My Baby?
Yes. To prevent making your baby too warm:

Don’t sit in a Jacuzzi. A long, warm bath is fine, but not in water over 100°F (37.7°C).

Exercise less intensely if you feel tired. Base your workout on how you feel, not on your heart rate. Heart rates aren’t a good way to measure effort during pregnancy.

Can I Lift And Carry Safely?
Yes, if your healthcare provider doesn’t tell you otherwise. Learn to lift and carry safely to prevent injury and reduce back pain during pregnancy. To protect your back:

Bend at the knees to bring the load nearer.

Get a good grip. Test the weight of the load.

Tighten your belly. Exhale as you lift.

Lift with your legs, not with your back.

Carry the load close to your body.

Hold the load so you can see where you are going.

What If I Get Sick?
Most people get sick at least once during pregnancy. Talk with your healthcare provider if you do. Most likely it will not affect your pregnancy. Get plenty of rest and fluids and eat what you can. Talk with your provider before taking any medicines.

Pregnancy FAQ
Pregnancy is an exciting time in a woman’s life, but it can also be a new experience and full of unknowns. As a large practice with many experienced OB-GYNs, we’ve fielded a lot of questions related to pregnancy. We’ve answered some of the most frequently asked questions in the list below.

Got pregnancy questions? Let’s set up a time to discuss them. Get in touch with us using our online form or give us a call.

 

Are there any dietary restrictions during pregnancy?
Diet during pregnancy should be focused on eating a variety of nutrient-rich foods that nourish the mother as well as the developing baby. This should include plenty of fresh fruits and vegetables, carbohydrates from grains and breads and protein from fish, meat or nonmeat sources, such as beans and legumes. Women should also take a prenatal vitamin before and throughout pregnancy to ensure that they are getting all of the nutrients their baby requires, including folic acid.

Pregnant women should avoid certain foods and beverages to reduce the risk of sickness, pregnancy complications and birth defects. These include:

Alcohol – should be completely avoided during pregnancy
Caffeine – no more than 200 mg/day (about 1-2 cups of caffeinated beverages)
Raw meat (including sushi that contains raw fish)
Foods that may carry listeria bacteria including raw eggs, deli meat, hot dogs, soft cheeses, pates and unpasteurized dairy products
Fish known to contain high mercury concentrations including shark, swordfish, tilefish and king mackerel.

Can I exercise while I’m pregnant?
Regular exercise during pregnancy is safe and can even be beneficial. It can reduce the risk of gestational diabetes and ease constipation and back pain. As a rule, a woman may continue her normal fitness routine while she is pregnant, though some adjustments may be advised. Pregnant women should check with their OB-GYN to make sure their exercise routine is safe.

Generally, low-impact and nonstrenuous activities are best. Contact activities such as football or soccer should be avoided in order to protect the abdomen, as should those which involve repeated jumping or bouncing. Pregnant women should also take extra measures to stay well hydrated and avoid overheating while exercising.


Which over-the-counter medications are safe to take during pregnancy?
Some over-the-counter (OTC) medications are safe to use during pregnancy, but a handful of common medications, including aspirin and ibuprofen, should be completely avoided. All medications should be used sparingly during the first 12 weeks (the first trimester), a particularly important period of fetal organ development.

OTC medications that are safe to use during pregnancy include:

Tylenol
Sudafed (avoid during first trimester)
Robitussin DM
Imodium
Benadryl
Metamucil, Colace, Miralax, Milk of Magnesia – for constipation
Tums, Rolaids, Pepcid, Gaviscon – for heartburn and indigestion
The above is not a complete list. When in doubt, a woman should be in close contact with her OB-GYN to discuss taking OTC medications and supplements during pregnancy.

What changes will I have to make to my lifestyle during pregnancy?
Some women may need to adopt certain lifestyle changes in order to have the healthiest possible pregnancy and to avoid complications such as gestational diabetes, miscarriage and birth defects. The following adjustments should be made before a woman starts trying to get pregnant, and certainly after she is pregnant:

Stop use of all tobacco products
Stop use of all recreational drugs including marijuana
Stop drinking alcohol
Lose weight if overweight, or gain weight if underweight
Start taking a prenatal vitamin
Eliminate exposure to environmental toxins in the home and workplace, including avoiding scooping cat litter, which can spread a parasite infection called toxoplasmosis.
What are the normal “side effects” of pregnancy?
pregnancy | CU OB-GYN | pregnant woman browsing internetAs the body undergoes significant changes to accommodate and support the developing fetus, certain pregnancy symptoms and side effects are to be expected. Some of the more common ones are listed below.

Morning sickness 
Morning sickness is nausea and vomiting that tends to occur in the first trimester of pregnancy. Despite its name, it may occur any time of the day, though many women experience the most severe symptoms upon waking. For most, morning sickness goes away after the first trimester, but for a small number of women it may last throughout the pregnancy.

Medical treatment for morning sickness is usually not needed, as it tends to resolve on its own as pregnancy progresses. Eating small meals throughout the day can help reduce nausea, and in some cases an OB-GYN may advise a patient to take certain anti-nausea medications for relief of symptoms. Natural remedies such as peppermint and ginger can also be helpful.

Constipation
Constipation during pregnancy is common and can be attributed to a variety of factors. Early in pregnancy, constipation is often caused by changing hormones and increased water absorption in the intestines, both of which slow down the digestive system. Prenatal vitamins can also cause constipation in some women. As the pregnancy progresses, decreased physical activity and the enlargement of the uterus can also cause constipation.

To ease constipation during pregnancy, women are encouraged to eat a fiber-rich diet, increase water intake and exercise regularly.

Mood changes & fatigue
Mood swings and fatigue are very common aspects of pregnancy. They are attributed to hormonal and physical changes in the body. Changes in mood tend to be particularly severe early in the pregnancy and late in the third trimester as the body prepares for birth.

Some women experience depression during pregnancy, a condition known as antepartum depression. This can be very serious and debilitating. A woman experiencing persistent feelings of hopelessness, guilt, anxiety or lack of interest in things she normally enjoys should contact her doctor right away to discuss treatment options. Our PROMISE Perinatal Mood Disorder Clinic screens our patients from the 20th week of pregnancy and beyond birth for mood problems, offering treatment and support.


Heartburn
As hormone changes brought on by pregnancy cause the digestive system to slow, food stays in the stomach longer. This can lead to acid reflux, in which stomach acid bubbles into the esophagus and throat and causes a painful burning sensation. Additionally, the growing baby can put pressure on the stomach, worsening heartburn symptoms.

Women experiencing heartburn during pregnancy may find relief by eating smaller, more frequent meals, avoiding foods that trigger heartburn, drinking plenty of fluids, and taking antacids such as Tums or Rolaids. If these measures don’t resolve a patient’s heartburn, physicians will often prescribe heartburn medication.

Fetal movement
Sometime during the second trimester, the movement of the baby becomes detectable. This subtle movement is called “quickening.” As the baby develops, the movements will become more pronounced, because the baby is beginning to stretch, hiccup, kick and turn.

During the third trimester pregnant women are advised to take note of how often their baby is moving. As a rule, 12 or more movements should be felt throughout the day during the third trimester. If a woman is observing fewer movements or a sudden decrease in fetal movement, she should contact her OB-GYN.

Contractions
Throughout the third trimester, women will experience an irregular pattern of contractions. These are called Braxton Hicks contractions, and unlike labor contractions, they do not occur in a pattern or increase in severity. However, they are sometimes painful.

True labor contractions tend to last longer than Braxton Hicks contractions (up to a full minute) and will occur at a regular frequency with increasing severity.

For more detail about what symptoms to expect throughout each trimester of pregnancy, explore the topics below.

  

How can I plan for labor and delivery?
Developing a birth plan is an important part of pregnancy for most women. A birth plan addresses how the baby will be delivered (vaginally or via cesarean section), how to manage labor pain, desired birthing position, who will be present in the room during delivery, and other important details. Expecting mothers should plan on discussing their birthing plan preferences with their OB-GYN.


Do I really need to take a prenatal vitamin?
This is a good question for you and your doctor to discuss. But most OB-GYNs and pediatricians suggestion expectant moms take a prenatal vitamin containing folic acid throughout their pregnancy. As the U.S. Public Health Service explains, “all women capable of becoming pregnant (should) consume 400 micrograms of folic acid daily to prevent neural tube defects (NTDs).”
How many appointments will I need throughout my pregnancy?
Prenatal care during pregnancy is absolutely essential. “This consistent care can help keep you and your baby healthy, spot problems if they occur, and prevent problems during delivery,” explains the OWH.

Routine checkups usually occur:
Once each month, from week four through week 28
Twice a month, from week 28 through week 36
Weekly from week 36 until you give birth.
The above schedule may change slightly, depending on your pregnancy and your OB-GYN’s practice policies. Be sure to speak with you doctor for a complete schedule of your prenatal appointments.
How many ultrasounds will I have?
Ultrasound exams can be performed at any point during pregnancy, but they aren’t always considered a routine prenatal test. Most OB-GYNs suggest moms-to-be have at least two:
The first test usually occurs during your first trimester as part of a biophysical profile (a prenatal ultrasound evaluation).
The second is typically scheduled between 18 and 20 weeks, “to look for signs of problems with the baby's organs and body systems and confirm the age of the fetus and proper growth,” says the OWH.
When can I find out the gender of my baby?
During your second-trimester ultrasound appointment, you may be able to learn the gender of your baby; generally between 18 and 20 weeks, according to the OWH.
Can I still exercise during my pregnancy?
The Office of Women’s Health reports that you can indeed exercise throughout your pregnancy. “Unless your doctor tells you not to, try to get at least two hours and 30 minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic activity a week,” the OWH advises.

To maximize the health benefits of working out during pregnancy, and to keep you and your baby safe, spread out your workouts throughout the week. “If you worked out regularly before pregnancy, you can keep up your activity level as long as your health doesn’t change and you talk to your doctor about your activity level throughout your pregnancy,” adds the OWH.
How much weight should I gain during pregnancy?
“You should gain weight gradually during your pregnancy, with most of the weight gained in the last three months,” according to the USDA Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion.

The government agency suggests women gain weight at the following rate:

1 to 4 pounds total during the first three months (first trimester)
2 to 4 pounds per month during the fourth to ninth months (second and third trimesters)
The total amount you gain during pregnancy depends on your weight at the time of conception. For women who maintained a healthy preconception weight, the USDA suggests gaining between 25 and 35 pounds. Be sure to speak with you doctor to find out what rate and amount of weight gain are right for you.
How will I know when it's time to go to the hospital?
Clock your contractions to track when they start, how long they last and time between each. This is a good indicator of how soon the first stages of labor will start. “With true labor, contractions become regular, stronger and more frequent,” says the OWH. These contractions will also establish a regular pattern and not taper off or go away, even if you change position or alter your activity.

“If you ever are unsure if contractions are true labor, call your doctor,” recommends the OWH. A quick phone chat will ease your mind and help you understand if you need to stay home and wait a bit longer, or jump in the car and head to the hospital.


How Will I Feel When I’m Pregnant?
Pregnancy symptoms in the first trimester of pregnancy may not appear until the middle or end of the second month. Hormonal changes will cause tenderness in your breasts, and you may begin to feel more tired than usual Food cravings, an increase in the need to urinate, and morning sickness may all be more noticeable. You may also suffer from heartburn.

Pregnancy symptoms in the second trimester are more prominent. Your breasts begin to grow along with your belly. You may start to feel the baby move and become more active. Dental issues, nasal/sinus problems, and skin irritations can begin to appear. Leg cramps, dizziness, and a vaginal discharge are also common. Every woman is different when it comes to the symptoms they experience, and some may not experience any at all.

Pregnancy symptoms in the third trimester can include increased frequency in urination, leg cramps, constipation, ligament pain in the abdomen, and weight gain. Back pain and Braxton Hicks contractions will become increasingly more common. Some women begin to experience high blood pressure and the symptoms of gestational diabetes.

The hormonal changes that caused breast tenderness in the first trimester may also lead to fluctuations in your emotions. You may go from being incredibly happy to extremely sad, crying at the smallest things. This is all part of a healthy pregnancy and will be monitored by your obstetricians and their staff.

Can I exercise while I am pregnant?
The answer is a resounding yes! Pregnant women can and should exercise on a regular basis. Regular exercise keeps circulation and heart function strong. Proper exercise improves flexibility and will keep your muscles strong and resilient, which will help when it is time for you to deliver the baby. Walking, swimming, stretching, and yoga or Pilates are all exceptional forms of exercise that work well for pregnant women. Staying fit and strong will make the birthing process go much smoother, and in some cases, much faster.

During pregnancy, it may be more difficult to perform certain types of exercise. Lifting weights or using weight machines may be limited as you move into the third trimester. Exercises may have to be modified to account for the shift in your center of gravity and ensure that you can continue to exercise without injuring yourself or the baby.

How much weight gain is acceptable during pregnancy?
Every woman will gain weight differently during pregnancy. As one of the first pregnancy symptoms, weight gain can get out of control rather quickly. It’s important to work with the gynecologists and obstetricians at your OB-GYN office to effectively manage your weight and keep it under control. Walking and swimming are ideal exercises for managing your weight.

Women who are at an optimum weight before pregnancy should only gain between 25 and 35 pounds. Underweight women should gain a little more, while overweight women should gain a little less. On average, the CDC has found that only 32% of pregnant women gain the suggested amount of weight for their pre-pregnancy size. Most gain more weight than they should.

Several factors affect pregnancy weight. In addition to hormonal fluctuations, food cravings, high blood pressure, gestational diabetes, and a decrease in activity can all play a role in the weight gain associated with pregnancy. It’s essential to work with your doctor as well as a nutritional counselor to keep your weight under control. Prenatal vitamins and supplements will ensure you get the nutrients you need without all of the extra calories.

How Will I Know My Due Date?
Understanding how due dates are calculated is important. A woman can normally count on 36 to 40 weeks of pregnancy. To efficiently calculate your due date, you will need to know the date of your last menstrual period — 280 days or 40 weeks from the first day of your last period will be your due date.

The due date of a pregnancy is only an estimation. In reality, less than 5% of babies are born on the due date the mother is given. Many factors affect the due date of a child. Considering menstrual periods are not always like clockwork, just one day can throw off the due date.

What Prenatal Vitamins Do I Need?
Pregnant women have special nutritional needs. As part of a prenatal care plan, obstetricians prescribe prenatal vitamins to ensure both mother and child get the nutrients they need. Nutrients like folic acid are harder to come by if you try to get all of your vitamins and minerals from the foods you eat.

It can be difficult to choose the right prenatal vitamin. At OB-GYN Associates of Hampton, the obstetricians and nursing staff will be able to help you find the right supplements and prenatal vitamins to keep you and your baby as healthy as possible.

What Professionals Do I Need for Pregnancy?
Obstetricians and gynecologists are often confused with one another. A gynecologist specializes in women’s reproductive health. A gynecologist also deals with birth control and the implantation of IUDs. Obstetricians, on the other hand, deal with pregnancy and the health conditions that are related to it. This includes conditions like preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, and postpartum depression.

A midwife is a person who receives all of the proper training that is needed to deliver babies in a variety of situations. Some are allowed to work in hospital settings, while others often perform home births for those who do not want their child to be born in a hospital setting.

A doula is not formally trained but has the necessary experience to guide and support a woman who is ready to give birth. Doulas continue to work with the new mother for the first few days after the birth of the child.

What Can I Eat During Pregnancy?
A pregnant woman can eat almost anything she wants during pregnancy. Because of the increase in nutritional demands on the body, eating a balanced diet is essential. This means avoiding empty calories found in refined sugars and alcohol. Eliminating fatty foods is also important. It’s also a good idea to cut out anything with caffeine. Depending on your physical health, your obstetrician will be able to help you come up with a list of foods you should remove from your diet.

In order for pregnant women to maintain their health and well-being, they must include the right foods. Shop around for the freshest fruits and vegetables possible. Drink the freshest fruit juices and include wholesome dairy foods for calcium and Vitamin D. Eating a healthy, well-balanced diet is also essential after childbirth if you plan on breastfeeding.

During pregnancy, it’s important to focus on eating a balanced diet. A balanced diet offers the maximum amount of nutrients and fiber with the fewest calories. For many women, this can be difficult, especially during pregnancy. Working with a nutritionist who specializes in creating personalized diet plans is the best option for focusing on a balanced diet.

What Is a Typical Visit Schedule for an OB-GYN During Pregnancy?
A typical visit schedule normally starts as soon as you have a positive pregnancy test. If you have pregnancy symptoms, it’s important that you schedule your first visit to your OB-GYN as soon as possible. Normally, obstetricians will want to see a pregnant mother once a month until the last six or eight weeks of the pregnancy. During the last three months, it may be increased to once every two weeks. The last month of the pregnancy will see a lot of changes. Your obstetrician may want to start seeing you once a week until the baby is born.

If you begin to experience pregnancy complications like gestational diabetes or high blood pressure, your obstetrician may ask to see you more often and also recommend bed rest or limited amounts of activity. It’s vital that your doctor closely monitor these conditions to ensure that no harm comes to the mother or the baby.

What Is the Best Way to Reduce Your Baby’s Risk of Birth Defects?
Folic acid is a vital nutrient that is necessary for the health and well-being of the newborn. It is also essential for proper development. It’s important to choose a prenatal vitamin with the necessary folic acid and other essential nutrients.

The best way to keep your baby’s risk to a minimum is to attend all of your routinely scheduled prenatal appointments. This gives your obstetrician a chance to closely monitor your pregnancy and help maintain your and your baby’s good health. Monthly visits allow your obstetrician to pay close attention to any changes or abnormalities you may experience during your pregnancy.

While taking supplements can be beneficial, some may not be good for your baby. Follow your doctor’s orders and only take the supplements and medications they recommend. If you are on medication for a specific health condition, you will want to discuss your options with your doctor before ceasing the medication. Certain types of medication are associated with both birth defects and an increased risk of a baby being stillborn.

Why Did I Start Bleeding? Should I Be Concerned?
During the first few weeks of pregnancy, changes in the cervix and uterus may lead to spotting or intermittent bleeding. This is completely normal. If the bleeding lasts longer than you are comfortable with, call your obstetrician. If you are keeping up with your monthly visits to your OB-GYN, they will be able to closely monitor the situation.

If you have any concerns or feel pain or discomfort, call your OB-GYN and ask for a well-being check. They will be able to uncover the cause of your discomfort and recommend a possible treatment plan to get it under control. It’s important that the placenta and embryonic sac stay intact throughout the pregnancy. If there is any kind of disruption or damage, your doctor may recommend a C-section.

Heavy bleeding is a serious sign and should not be ignored. Any time you start to bleed heavily, it’s crucial that you call your doctor right away. Right before the baby’s birth, you may experience what is referred to as the “bloody show.” This is actually a mucus plug that builds up to keep the birth canal secure. Once it is released, the baby’s birth is not far behind.

What kind of medications can I take during pregnancy?
If you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant, you may want to know what medications and herbal remedies are safe to take after you become pregnant. It is best to discuss your current medications with your doctor before you conceive. As soon as you know you are pregnant, inform your doctor, pharmacist, nurse midwife, mental health provider, and other health providers and discuss what medicines are safe for you to take.

If you are breast-feeding, some medications may pass into the breast milk and cause unwanted effects on your nursing baby. Check with your doctor about taking medications after the baby is born, as well.

What if I feel contractions early, before the baby is due?
During the first 37 weeks of pregnancy, you should call your doctor if you feel five or more contractions an hour, even if they don't hurt. Most women feel the baby's movement and contractions, or tightening of the uterus, throughout pregnancy. These contractions are often called false labor contractions because they don't lead to the birth of the baby. Most of the time, these contractions are normal, and help the uterus get strong in preparation for the work of labor. However, if you have regular contractions (more than five in one hour) and you are less than 37 weeks pregnant, you should call your doctor right away.

How will I know this is real labor, not false labor?
You are in true labor when your contractions are dilating, or opening the cervix; or when the amniotic membrane, your bag of water, breaks. The only way to know for sure is to go to the doctor's office or hospital where your cervix can be checked. When you are not sure, or have questions, call your doctor's office. Remember, before 37 weeks of pregnancy, if you feel regular contractions, or more than five in an hour, even if they don't hurt, call your doctor right away.

If you think you may be in labor, pay attention to the nature of your contractions.
When you are 37 weeks pregnant or more, watching and waiting is the best test. True labor won't go away, no matter what you do. False labor will eventually stop.
Time your contractions, from the beginning of one to the beginning of the next. Write them down for about an hour.
Look for a pattern. Are they consistently between 5 and 6 minutes apart, or is the time between contractions varied, first 5 minutes, then 2 minutes, then 10 minutes, then 8 minutes, for example? True labor contractions will develop a pattern, and over a few hours, get closer together and more uncomfortable - longer, stronger and closer together.
Take a walk. True labor contractions usually become harder and stronger with activity. False labor contractions often go away or become much weaker with activity such as walking. 
How do contractions feel? True labor contractions most often start in the back, move to the front very low over your pubic bone, and then go away slowly, moving back. False labor contractions are often felt high and in the front; it may feel like the baby is balling up.
Wait awhile. True labor will get stronger and more uncomfortable. False labor will go away or become less noticeable.
When can I get an epidural if I want it?
Epidural anesthesia is often used to relieve the pain of labor. You and your doctor will evaluate your condition and your discomfort before administering an epidural. For most, it is available soon after you ask for it. However, it will not be given as soon as you arrive at the hospital. The general guidelines are:

You and your baby must be managing labor contractions well.
You must have an IV in place and the required lab results must be verified by anesthesia personnel.
Can I change my mind about pain medicine or epidural?
Yes. Each labor is different. Being prepared means being ready to deal with your labor, however it feels. It's all right to start out with one plan and change your mind. Even if you're not planning on having an epidural, be sure you sign the epidural permission form anyway. It does not mean you will receive one, but will allow you to receive one in case you change your mind as your labor progresses. Your nurse and your doctor will help you know what's available.

Do I need an enema before going to the hospital?
The answer to this question differs from patient to patient and from physician to physician. Discuss the use of an enema with your doctor.

What if there is an emergency and I need a Cesarean section?
Your nurse is constantly aware of your contractions and how your baby is doing. She is talking regularly with your doctor. In case of an emergency, or when the decision is made that a Cesarean delivery will be needed, your doctor will explain the reasons. The operating rooms are in the Labor and Delivery area; the anesthesia staff, obstetrician and neonatology staff are available 24 hours a day, so C-sections can be performed at any time.

Can my support person come to the operating room for a C-section?
As long as mother and baby are doing well, most doctors allow your support person to be present for Cesarean delivery. When the support partner is not comfortable going into the operating room, when a medical emergency exists or mom has general anesthesia, the support person waits in the waiting room while the baby is delivered.

How should I prepare for a scheduled induction or a C-section?
If you have a scheduled induction or C-section, do not eat or drink after midnight before your appointment at the hospital. If you do, the procedure may be postponed.

Do I have to have an episiotomy?
An episiotomy is the cut the doctor makes to enlarge the vaginal opening. Many women, especially first-time moms, have an episiotomy. If you do not have an epidural, a numbing shot is given. After birth, the episiotomy is stitched closed. The stitches dissolve a week or so after birth. Talk with your doctor if you want to avoid an episiotomy.

When is it time to go to the hospital?
Ask your doctor first. The general rule for those more than 37 weeks pregnant is to go to the hospital when contractions are four to five minutes apart and have been steady for an hour, or when your water breaks.

Do I need to call the hospital first?
No, the Maternity Centers are open 24 hours a day, fully staffed and ready to care for you when you arrive.

What if I go to the hospital too early?
Early labor is the longest part of labor. For most, there is no need to be at the hospital during this time, unless your water has broken. If you come to the hospital in early labor, your doctor may send you home where you will be more comfortable. Spend this time resting, watching TV or a movie, taking a walk or other activities to help the time pass. Eat very lightly and drink plenty of fluids. Many women come to the hospital, only to be sent home, so do not be embarrassed.

What if the baby comes too fast and is born before I get to the hospital?
This is a common fear of expectant parents, but the least common complication. Most women have plenty of time to get to the hospital. If you discover the baby is arriving right away, call 911 for emergency assistance

What forms will I sign and what are they for?
See the permission form section for forms that you will sign will at the hospital.

Do I have to have an IV and fetal monitor?
The fetal monitor and IV are routine procedures for most patients. Many doctors believe it is safe for mother and baby to have an IV in place in case medicines are needed quickly, and the fetal monitor will ensure that the baby's condition is checked at all times. If either of these routine procedures concerns you, talk to your doctor before entering the hospital.

Can I eat or drink when in labor?
Most doctors recommend you stop eating when you realize you are in true labor. Eat and drink lightly if you think you may be in labor, as many women become nauseated and vomit during labor. It is important you get plenty of fluids to avoid dehydration, so sip clear liquids or eat popsicles or ice during the early part of labor. When you are admitted to the hospital, the IV will allow fluids to be given directly, and ice chips are available if your doctor allows. The good news is most laboring women are not hungry.

Do I have to stay in bed while I'm in labor at home?
During the early part of labor when you will probably be at home, most women like to move around, walk, rock in a rocking chair, watch television or listen to music. Frequently changing positions and moving will help you stay comfortable and keep your labor moving. Remember, the baby is moving down, so positions such as standing and sitting up make it easier for the downward movement to occur.

Will I have to stay in bed during labor at the hospital?
When you are admitted to the hospital, the IV will be placed in a vein in your arm, and the fetal monitor will record your contractions and the baby's heartbeat. If your doctor allows it, and you and your baby are doing well with the work of labor, you may sit up in the bed, or on the side of the bed, or sit in a chair in your birthing room. Some mothers even like to stand beside the bed or walk around the room. While many women prefer to stay in bed once they arrive at the hospital, you may ask your nurse to help you find the most comfortable position.

Can I have visitors during labor?
With your doctor's approval, you may choose to have support people join you while in labor. A limited number of people are allowed in the birthing room. While hospital policy does not prohibit visitors during labor, you are encouraged to have only one or two support people there to help you. You may visit with friends and family after the baby has been born.

I want to have my baby without an epidural or other kinds of pain medicine. Can I do that?
Many women deliver babies without pain medicine. If you want to give birth without medication, it is important to prepare ahead of time and to learn some basic techniques that will help you during labor. Relaxation, controlled breathing and the help of a support partner are very important. Taking classes, watching videos and practicing will make these techniques helpful during labor.

What about pain relief? When can I get medicine for pain?
Most women do not need medicine for pain until labor has been going on for several hours. Before you can receive medicine for pain, your doctor must prescribe it.

What are the early signs of pregnancy?
Pregnancy symptoms differ from person to person and pregnancy to pregnancy. Some women might start to notice changes within the first week and some might not until they miss a period. The surest way to know you’re pregnant is to take a pregnancy test or contact your healthcare provider.

Here are some common early signs of pregnancy:

Missed period. If you’re in your childbearing years and a week or more has passed without the start of an expected menstrual cycle, you might be pregnant. However, this symptom can be misleading if you have an irregular menstrual cycle.
Tender, swollen breasts. Early in pregnancy hormonal changes might make your breasts sensitive and sore. The discomfort will likely decrease after a few weeks as your body adjusts to hormonal changes.
Nausea with or without vomiting. Morning sickness, which can occur at any time of the day or night, often begins in the first trimester. However, some women feel nausea earlier and some never experience it. Pregnancy hormones likely play a role.
Increased urination. You might find yourself urinating more often than usual. The amount of blood in your body increases during pregnancy, causing your kidneys to process extra fluid that ends up in your bladder.
Fatigue. Fatigue also ranks high among early symptoms of pregnancy. During early pregnancy, levels of the hormone progesterone soar – which might make you feel sleepy.
It is important to note that several of these symptoms are not exclusive to pregnancy, and could indicate sickness or an upcoming period. You can also be pregnant without experiencing these symptoms.
Still, if you miss a period and notice some of the above signs or symptoms, take a home pregnancy test or see your health care provider. If your home pregnancy test is positive, make an appointment with your health care provider.

When is my baby due?
In general, pregnancies last around 40 weeks (or 38 weeks from conception), so the best way to estimate your due date is to count 40 weeks, or 280 days, from the first day of your last period. This is an estimated due date based on the typical number of weeks of pregnancy and should not be used as an exact deadline for your baby to arrive. You can also use a due date calculator to help with getting a more accurate date. Additionally, your health care practitioner will have a better idea of your due date after your first prenatal care visit.

What foods should I avoid during pregnancy?
As a general rule of thumb, most foods are safe to consume during pregnancy. However, there are some you should be careful with or avoid completely to protect the well-being of your baby.

Here are some foods you should be careful with or avoid:

Dairy: Imported soft cheeses or unpasteurized dairy may contain listeria bacteria, which can cause serious illness in pregnant women and babies. 

Any other foods made from unpasteurized milk, such as soft ripened goats' cheese
Pasteurized or unpasteurised mold-ripened soft cheeses with a white coating on the outside, such as Brie, Camembert, and chèvre (unless cooked until steaming hot)
Pasteurised or unpasteurized soft blue cheeses, such as Danish blue, Gorgonzola and Roquefort (unless cooked until steaming hot)
Unpasteurized cows' milk, goats' milk, sheep's milk or cream
Meats: Undercooked meat, deli meat, and cold cured meats can contain harmful bacteria and should be avoided. Cook all meats thoroughly before consumption.

Be careful with cold cured meats, such as salami, pepperoni, chorizo, and prosciutto (unless cooked thoroughly).Raw or undercooked meat
Liver and liver products due to high vitamin A content
All types of pâté, including vegetarian pâté
Game meats such as goose, partridge or pheasant 
Eggs: Raw or undercooked eggs may contain listeria bacteria. Pasteurized egg products such as commercially available dressings are generally considered safe. 

Raw or partially cooked hen eggs
Raw or partially cooked duck, goose, or quail eggs
Fish: Certain kinds of fish may contain harmful levels of mercury and other heavy metals. Wild caught, low-mercury species of fish is generally considered safe and even beneficial due to omega-3 content. Check here for more about which fish are safe to eat. 

Smoked fish (Smoked Salmon & Trout)
Raw tuna
Swordfish
King Mackerel
Marlin
Shark
Raw Shellfish
Other: Use caution or avoid the following foods and drinks during pregnancy

Limit to 200mg of caffeine per day.
Avoid alcohol consumption.
Drink no more than 4 cups of herbal tea a day.
Make sure to thoroughly wash all fruits, vegetables, and salad ingredients.
Do not take high-dose multivitamin supplements, or any supplements with vitamin A in them.
Can I exercise during pregnancy?
Exercise is important to keep our bodies healthy throughout our life. Moderate exercise during pregnancy has been repeatedly shown to be safe and have beneficial effects. Studies show that a combination of cardiovascular and strength training along with yoga is best during pregnancy. Additionally, pregnant women who exercise are less likely to experience pregnancy complications such as gestational diabetes, high blood pressure, and preeclampsia.

You might begin to find your body is more tired in the third trimester, bringing a number of physical challenges, including pelvic pain, back pain, and more. This tiredness is normal and it is important to find a routine that works for you. A combination of cardio, mobility, and strength exercises can be continued throughout and will assist in preparing your body for birth. The key here is to listen to your body. At any point, if you feel pain or discomfort, stop exercising and contact your doctor for medical advice.

How much bleeding is normal during pregnancy?
Bleeding and spotting (light bleeding) from the vagina during pregnancy are common, and it may not be a sign of a problem. In fact, up to 1 out of 4 of all pregnant women have some bleeding or spotting during their pregnancy. Tell your provider about any bleeding you experience even if it is light so that your provider can find out what is causing it. At any time, if you have heavy bleeding, seek medical care right away as this can be a sign of miscarriage.

What prenatal vitamins should I take?
Prenatal vitamins and eating healthy foods are most important for women’s health and make sure your baby gets essential nutrients. These are different from regular multivitamins as your body now needs more nutrients. Make sure your prenatal vitamin has folic acid, iron, and calcium in it as these are important to ensure a healthy baby. It is also important to make sure you get enough vitamin D, DHA, and iodine each day. Do not take any supplements without first talking to your provider. Do not forget to mention your dietary restrictions to your provider as this can influence which supplements you require.

Which healthcare providers do I need to see?
Prenatal care is extremely important throughout your months of pregnancy to check on you and your growing baby. An obstetrician/gynecologist (also called OB/GYN) is a doctor who specializes in taking care of pregnant women and delivering babies. It is vital to find the right obstetric care especially if this is your first time pregnant. Do not be afraid to talk to your provider about personal matters and history as it is their job to help you on your journey.

How much weight should I gain?
During your first check up, your provider will check your weight and height to figure out appropriate weight gain during pregnancy for your body. According to the CDC, the amount of weight you gain depends on your BMI pre pregnancy and if you are pregnant with more than one baby. It is important to gain the recommended amount of weight so the baby is not too small. Some babies born too small may be more at risk for illness and may have a difficult time breastfeeding.

When does morning sickness begin?
One of the most common pregnancy questions is regarding morning sickness in the first trimester and throughout the rest of the pregnancy. About 7 in 10  pregnant women have morning sickness in the first trimester (first 3 months) of pregnancy. It usually starts at about 6 weeks of pregnancy and is at its worst at about 9 weeks. Most women feel better in their second trimester, but some may have morning sickness throughout pregnancy. Talk to your provider about ways to aid with discomfort or if your morning sickness persists into month 4 of your pregnancy.

When do food cravings begin?
Although there is no steadfast rule surrounding food cravings and is different for every pregnant woman, generally cravings might begin in the first trimester and get stronger in the second trimester. They will eventually slow down in the third trimester. These cravings can call for unhealthy foods so it is important to keep these temptations to a minimum to avoid any discomfort such as heartburn, and make sure you get the essential nutrients your body needs. It is also important to note that if you find yourself craving things that are not food, like toothpaste, coal or even soil, speak to your healthcare provider, as this could be a sign of a vitamin deficiency.

What should I expect at my first prenatal care visit?
Your first prenatal care visit will consist of a consultation discussing your health history and running some tests. You should expect this appointment to be one of the longest you will have during your pregnancy. Your first appointment will include a general checkup and confirmation of your pregnancy as well as some tests including urine test, blood work, genetic carrier screening, STD tests, pap smear, and blood sugar test. Many practitioners might conduct an ultrasound during the first visit, which is the most accurate way of dating a pregnancy. This is also the time to ask questions and share personal health history with your provider. It is their job to help you on your journey so do not be afraid to get personal.

How can I help reduce the risk of birth defects?
Not all birth defects can be prevented, but it is important to take measures to ensure a healthy pregnancy and avoid negative outcomes such as stillbirth, preterm labor, and other complications.

Here are some tips on how to reduce the risk of birth defects:

Plan ahead when considering getting pregnant.
See a healthcare professional regularly.
Keep health conditions such as diabetes under control.
Avoid harmful substances such as alcohol and drugs.
Avoid overheating and treat fevers properly.
Maintain a healthy weight.
Choosing a healthy lifestyle by managing conditions and adopting good behaviors can increase your chances of having a healthy baby.
Pregnancy can be an overwhelming time, but knowing that you are doing everything you can to get ready for the journey and staying healthy during your pregnancy will give your baby a healthy start in life and will help you to have peace of mind.


How will I feel when I'm pregnant?
Image of a computer screen showing an ultrasound scan.

Everyone is different, but hormones can cause lots of changes in your body and the way you feel. Some of us may have tender breasts, get tired easily or feel sick (at any time of the day, and not just in the morning). Even if you were planning on becoming pregnant, realising that you are can still come as a bit of a shock, so don’t worry if you feel up and down.

Why do I need a midwife?
Your midwife will make sure that you get the best possible care, tailored around you.

It’s known that high quality care throughout pregnancy, birth and following the birth can have a really positive effect on the health of women and babies, and on the healthy development of children throughout their life. That’s why your midwife, and other health professionals, work hard to make sure that wherever you live in Scotland and whatever your circumstances, we all have a positive experience of maternity and neonatal care.

Your midwife will be there for you every step of the way, supporting you throughout your pregnancy as well as after the birth. Chat with them about your needs and choices and then you can work together to plan what’s best for you and your baby.

How do I get a midwife?
Finding a midwife to help you through your pregnancy is easy. There's no need to see your GP first, you can book direct with a midwife. In most Health Board areas, you can make your first midwife appointment by asking your GP receptionist.

Watch a short film to see what happens at your first appointment by joining expectant mum Chloe on her first visit to her midwife Lauren.

Visit Ready Steady Baby for more help, hints and tips on getting ready for parenthood.

When should I arrange to see a midwife?
You should make an appointment with a midwife as soon as possible after finding out that you’re pregnant, even if you're a mum already. Getting in early means your midwife can help plan the best care for you and your baby.

For more information visit Ready Steady Baby.

Can my partner come to my appointments with me?
Absolutely! Dads and partners are very welcome at all appointments. It’s great to have someone to support you and to ask questions too. Here are some more ways your partner can support you.

Do I need to get any vaccinations?
The best way to protect yourself and your baby from serious disease and illness is to get the recommended vaccines at the right time. NHS Scotland recommends that pregnant women should have the COVID-19, flu and whooping cough vaccines. You can get the COVID-19 and flu vaccines at any stage of your pregnancy, while whooping cough is recommended from week 16. Ask you midwife for more information on how to get your vaccines.

You can find out more about the immunisations offered during pregnancy and why they’re so important on the NHS Inform website.

Is it true I can get free dental care when I'm pregnant?
Yes! Speak to your midwife who can tell you more, and explain how to get it.

How do I register for my Baby Box?
Baby asleep in the Baby Box, surrounded by items from the box

Scotland's Baby Box helps families prepare for the arrival of their baby – it's amazing how much stuff babies need! It’s really easy to sign up for your Baby Box. When you’re about 20-24 weeks pregnant, your midwife will fill in a Baby Box registration card with you at your regular antenatal appointment. Your midwife will send this card away to register you for your Baby Box, so you won’t need to do anything else. You can find out more about your Baby Box here.

What if I have any bleeding during my pregnancy?
Image of two adults sitting together on a sofa, looking at a clipboard.

If you experience any bleeding, tell your midwife straight away and get her advice.

Can I exercise when pregnant?
Yes, you can! Staying active is good for you and your baby. It can help you control weight gain, improve fitness, reduce high blood pressure, improve sleep, and improve your mood. All good!

How much exercise should I do?
Image of adults in an exercise class.

We know that you’ll have loads of other things to fill your day, but try to squeeze a little exercise here and there. Try and aim for about 150 minutes a week. This might sound like a lot – but if you break it up into two 15-minute bursts, 5 times a week, you’re there! You could do it in a couple of little walks each day, over the course of the week. If you’re already very sporty, you may have to cut down a bit while you’re pregnant. As a general rule, if you feel better for it, then keep doing it. But stop exercising if you feel it’s becoming uncomfortable for you. Your midwife can give you some advice on getting the balance just right. 

You can find more information and tips here.

What should I eat when pregnant?
We know that morning sickness makes eating and drinking challenging – but trust us, a good diet can help you feel so much better, from the inside out. 

It’s important to stay hydrated, so try to boost the amount of water you drink each day.
Try and eat at least 5 portions of fruit and vegetables a day. They’re a good source of vitamins, minerals and fibre, and you can eat them fresh, frozen, from a tin, dried or juiced – whichever way you like them. There’s a handy guide to portions here.
Every day, try to include 3-4 portions of carbohydrates. Things like bread, cereal, noodles, pasta, rice and potatoes. Even better, go for wholegrain or whole wheat varieties.
Making sure you’re getting enough dairy and Vitamin D means your wee baby’s bones will harden as they develop. Dairy contains calcium and is found in foods like yoghurt, milk and hard cheese. You’ll find some great ideas and options for getting your daily dairy here.
You can’t actually get enough Vitamin D from food alone, and a lot of it comes from sunshine. Since we don’t have much sun in Scotland, it’s best to take supplements all year round while you’re pregnant. You don’t need to buy expensive multi-vitamins. Everyone who's pregnant in Scotland can get free Healthy Start vitamins throughout their pregnancy, which contain Vitamin D. These are available from your midwife.
If you want to find out more about what you can and can't eat during pregnancy, visit the Ready Steady Baby website. Your midwife will also be able to talk you through the best ways to fit healthy food into your diet.

What foods should I avoid during pregnancy?
You’ve probably heard rumours about things you can’t eat during pregnancy. We’re happy to say that most foods are totally fine, and there are just a few things you should avoid.

If you’re pregnant, it’s important to make sure you thoroughly cook any ‘ready to eat’ smoked fish you buy, to avoid any risk of listeria poisoning. This includes fish in sushi. You can find out more about this on the Food Standards Scotland website.

What other pre-natal vitamins or supplements do I need?
You need to be at your healthiest when you’re pregnant or trying to conceive, so vitamins and minerals are even more important. Vitamins A, C, D are the ones you need the most, and Iron is also at the top of the list because it needs time to build up throughout pregnancy.

The free Heathy Start vitamins that are available are a great starting point but it’s also good to combine these with healthy meals that provide a source for these vitamins. We know it’s hard to have these in every meal, but here are a few foods you can find them in:

red meat
eggs
pulses
wholegrain bread
dark green vegetables
You could try adding some to every meal to make sure your iron levels stay high.

To find out more about how vitamins and minerals can help you look after yourself during your pregnancy, ask your midwife or visit Ready Steady Baby.

Why should I be taking folic acid tablets?
Image of the palm of a hand with one vitamin tablet on it.

Folic acid is totally natural and is a really good supplement when you’re expecting. It’s important for helping your baby’s spine to develop, even in the very early stages of pregnancy. It’s best to take folic acid while you’re trying to get pregnant, and continue taking it throughout your pregnancy.

How much caffeine can I have during pregnancy?
It’s best to cut right back, as caffeine can affect the birth weight of your baby. Generally, a cup of tea or coffee a day is fine. We know it’s hard but cut out fizzy drinks because the caffeine and sugar levels can be really high. You’ll find more information on eating healthily here.

Can I drink alcohol while I'm pregnant?
You shouldn’t drink any alcohol at all during pregnancy, as it could be harmful to your baby. By making the positive choice not to drink any alcohol while you’re pregnant or trying for a baby, you can feel confident that you’re helping to keep your baby safe and healthy.

What about smoking and pregnancy?
It’s not advisable to smoke while you’re pregnant. Do not let anyone else smoke around you, or in rooms where you and your baby will be. Smoking can cause pregnancy and labour complications, such as your baby being born too early or weighing less than normal. A baby with a low birth weight is more likely to pick up infections, have breathing difficulties and other health problems throughout their childhood. Giving up smoking is the best thing you, your partner and family can do for you and your baby. As soon as you stop, you reduce the risk of miscarriage or stillbirth, and risks to your baby such as cot death.

For more information on reasons to stop visit Ready Steady Baby. For help to stop call Quit Your Way on 0800 84 84 84 you can find out more about Quit Your Way here.

What can I do if my back or hips are sore?
As your baby grows inside you it puts a little bit more strain on your body, and that can lead to a sore back and hips in the final months of pregnancy. Doctors advise, that moving around as much as possible helps and, if you can, a bit of swimming and stretches (like yoga) can also help relieve aches and pains. But if you get really sore, speak with your midwife, as there might be extra support available to you.

When will I start to feel the baby kicking?
Most mums feel the first fidgets of their wee one – known as ‘quickening’ – between weeks 14 and 26 of their pregnancy, but it does vary. After those first little flurries, you’ll get to know your own baby’s pattern of movements. Remember, you can talk to your midwife about what to expect. And you’ll probably start to feel your bond with your baby growing as you get use to their movements.

What can I do to connect with my baby in the womb?
It might seem strange, but you can start to communicate with your baby before they’re born! By talking, singing and reading to your bump you’re helping your wee one get used to the sound of your voice and helping their development as well. You can also find out more about the benefits of reading to your baby before they’re born on the Scottish Book Trust website.